---
title: Kickstarting the project "Makers"
classes: wide
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/img/george-bakos-OvEr7BwXxxg.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.5
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
  caption: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@georgebakos?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText">George Bakos</a> on <a href="/s/photos/cambodia?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a>

---

My name is Tomoyuki Sakurai, or simply Tomi, from Japan, living (or being
stranded) in Siem Reap. This is the first post about my project I have been
working on since the last year: opening the first makerspace in Siem Reap.

I am drafting a Kickstarter project that outlines what the project is all
about.  Until the project page is ready, I would like to share the plan in our
blog.

Short version: I am trying to open the first makerspace in Siem Reap. The
project is part of my own business (I need to survive the pandemic just like
you). Still, the project is a community-based project. The space is called
_Makers_. Makers will focus on electronics, wood crafts, IoT, and _smart_
devices.

The project started in early 2019 when I was in Siem Reap. At that time, I was
living in Bangkok, Thailand. I finished all the courses, including writing and
reading, at a Thai Language school. Learning and mastering Thai was one of my
plans after quitting the previous job. I was looking for the next thing to do.
There were stories I cannot, and do not want to, disclose, but I was looking
for what I should do next. To make a long story short, I realised that I want
to help others, or do something that helps others. Since then, I have been
working on financial aspect of the project. In 2020 Feb, I signed the rent
contract, and became one of many foreign investors in the country.

Before introducing the project proposal in another post, I would like to
explain the situation in Siem Reap. I know only micro news around me, and
macro views, such as statistics, only. Nothing in between because I have
intentionally avoided to read local news.

When you ask Google about Siem Reap, or Cambodia, the search result is full of
useful information about the tourism in the country. Most of them are written
by tourists, or expats who run business for foreign tourists. I could not find
reports, or blog posts, that explain what is going on here. In Thailand, where
I spent the last 9 years, there are many bloggers and SNS users who regularly
report news, ranging from _micro news_ to the latest government policies. In
contrast, we have very few of them in Cambodia. Someone should write the
situation in the country. This is the first activity of the project.

## The situation in Cambodia

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/img/Closed-Stalls-in-Front-of-Market.jpg">
    <figcaption>Most of street vendors are gone. Siem Reap</figcaption>
</figure>

Thailand _was_ one of the most successful countries in ASEAN (but the worst
performer in recent years). Thailand, especially in tourism and manufacturing
industry, has been hit by the pandemic very hard. The economy had been
sluggish even before the pandemic. Many Thais are suffering from economic
crisis, not from the pandemic itself. The borders and the international
airports are closed. No foreign tourists. Contribution of the tourism in the
country to the GDP is around 20%. Shadow economy, including food stalls, small
mom-and-pop shops, and businesses outside of the tax system is huge in
Thailand. That means that numbers does not necessarily reflect the real impact
of the crisis.

The situation is similar, or worse, here in Cambodia.  Let's look at some
numbers of the country.

The country has been known as one of the poorest countries in the world. GDP
per capita in 2018 was [USD
1,510](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?end=2018&locations=KH-TH&start=1960&view=chart),
20% of Thailand's. Contribution of the tourism to the GDP is
[32.8%](https://knoema.com/atlas/Cambodia/topics/Tourism/Travel-and-Tourism-Total-Contribution-to-GDP/Contribution-of-travel-and-tourism-to-GDP-percent-of-GDP).

<figure class="half">
    <iframe src="https://data.worldbank.org/share/widget?end=2018&indicators=NY.GDP.PCAP.CD&locations=Z4-Z7-KH-XU&start=1993" width='450' height='300' frameBorder='0' scrolling="no" ></iframe>
    <iframe src="https://data.worldbank.org/share/widget?end=2018&indicators=NY.GDP.PCAP.CD&locations=KH-TH-MY-ID-VN&start=2000" width='450' height='300' frameBorder='0' scrolling="no" ></iframe>
    <figcaption>GDP per capita, World Bank</figcaption>
</figure>

Johns Hopkins University reports that the number of confirmed positive cases
in the country is 130, no death (2020/06/27).

The country's economy had been improving mostly thanks to China. Annual GDP
growth was around 7%, sometimes more than 10% ([GDP
growth from World Bank](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?end=2018&locations=KH&start=1995).
Sihanoukville, _the_ sea resort of the country, was the major destination of
Chinese money. After strict regulations of online gambling and the pandemic,
all the money, investors, and Chinese workers left the town, leaving unpaid
debts on Cambodians.

"The 20-second hand wash, advised to kill the virus, would mean roughly 1.5-2
litres per wash",
[wrote](https://www.downtoearth.org.in/blog/water/water-in-the-age-of-coronavirus-69905)
one of Time's 100 Most Influential People.  Of 16 million Cambodia nationals,
more than 3 million lack access to safe water ([Cambodia's water and
sanitation crisis](https://water.org/our-impact/where-we-work/cambodia/) from
water.org).

97.6% of households have access to electricity, 71.5% on the grid (commercial
power supply system), 26.1% off the grid (solar power system, or batteries).
69.3% of grid-connected households face frequent unpredictable power
shortages ([Cambodia - Beyond
connections](https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/141011521693254478/cambodia-beyond-connections-energy-access-diagnostic-report-based-on-the-multi-tier-framework)
from The World Bank). Many hotels and guesthouses have diesel generators for
occasional blackouts.

In 2018, the total number of international tourists arrivals was 6.2 million.
Two million from China, or 32%, 13% from European countries, 4.9% from South
Korea, 4.0% from the U.S., 3.4% from Japan ([Tourism statistics report
year
2018](https://www.tourismcambodia.com/tourist-information/tourist-statistic.htm)).
The tourism in Cambodia had been growing before the pandemic. The number of
international tourists recorded two digits growth rate in 2017 and 2018.
However, in April 2020, the latest number from Ministry of Tourism was
impressive; -99% (yes, minus ninety nine percent), or 4,841 arrivals.

At the moment very strict rules apply to those who enter the country,
including Cambodian nationals. For foreign tourists, it is virtually
impossible to visit Cambodia.  Curious readers should read "[Travel during the
pandemic: Chicago/Sydney > Seoul > Phnom
Penh](https://southeastasiaglobe.com/travel-to-cambodia-covid-19/)" from
Southeast Asia Globe. Unlike other democratic countries, Cambodia citizens are
not allowed to complain. [The PM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hun_Sen) has
ruled the country for more than three decades. That means no foreign tourists
in foreseeable future.

<figure class="half">
    <a href="/assets/img/International-Arrivals-2015-2019.svg"><img src="/assets/img/International-Arrivals-2015-2019.svg"></a>
    <a href="/assets/img/Year-on-year-tourists-arrival-2019-and-2020.svg"><img src="/assets/img/Year-on-year-tourists-arrival-2019-and-2020.svg"></a>
    <figcaption>International tourist arrivals, data from Ministry of Tourism, created by Tomoyuki Sakurai</figcaption>
</figure>

## What is happening in Siem Reap?

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/img/Business-for-Sale-at-Pub-Street.jpg">
    <figcaption>"Business for sale", a familiar sign in the town. Many businessess are closed indefinitely, or on sale. Pub Street, Siem Reap</figcaption>
</figure>

After the pandemic hit the rest of world, what happened in Siem Reap? Cambodia
has confirmed very few positive cases so far. Most of the positive cases are
either foreign tourists, or those who had close contact with them. WHO praised
Cambodia's efforts in the pandemic ([The first 100 days of the COVID-19
response](https://www.who.int/cambodia/news/feature-stories/detail/the-first-100-days-of-the-covid-19-response-past-investments-in-health-security-system-pay-off-and-learning-lessons-for-the-future)).

The situation is not better in any way, though. International flights are
canceled, the borders are closed, and potential tourists have been locked in
their countries. The government has been helping local businesses by waving
some taxes. But that's all. It was said that there were thousands of
restaurants and hotels in Siem Reap. Now, most of them are closed or on sale.
The Pub Street, where tourist used to enjoy night entertainments, is literally
a ghost town. Only few of family-owned businesses are open. Schools, including
public, private, international, and universities, are closed. Some parents
demand refund, but the schools have to pay fixed costs. It is unknown that how
many of them will be able to stay afloat. Kids are at home all the day. No
education. Teachers lost their income. Everyone suffers.

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/img/Kids-at-Home.jpg">
    <figcaption>Kids playing a game app on smartphone. "They play games
    everyday", said the mother. Wat Bo, Siem Reap</figcaption>
</figure>

Simon and Katrine, from Norway, the owners of [Babel
Guesthouse](https://www.babelsiemreap.com/), made a short video
to show how Angkor Wat looks now, and how people are affected.

{% youtube "https://youtu.be/DhquRBuQGto" %}

Their property (where I am writing this post, by the way) is still open, but
mostly empty. Their employees and local tuk-tuk drivers desperately need money
to survive. They decided to do whatever they can do in the hardship.

## The project begins

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/img/Cheng_Lay_Guesthouse_and_Staffs.jpg">
    <figcaption>My favorite family-owned guesthouse, Cheng Lay Guesthouse, is
    open again after 2 months. They are a lucky exception. Soksan Rd, Siem
    Reap</figcaption>
</figure>

I have never given money to beggars in my life because that will not help
them. Giving money to beggars encourages them to return to the street. In
general, the purpose of helping others should be making them independent from
the help, not just because you are sorry about them. Cambodians never asked me
money. They ask jobs. I cannot give the opportunity to them, yet, but I can
do something others cannot. They need guides, or assistance, not just money. I
would like to help those who help themselves, which is the one of my project's
goals.

Are you still withe me? Of course, you are. You have finished reading a rather
long story. Here is the reward for it: [the project proposal].
