---
title: Raising creative kids
tags:
  - micronews
  - stem
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/img/posts/Ice_Cream_Shop_at_Babel.jpeg
  caption: "Simon and Katrine built an ice cream shop for the kids. Wat Bo, Siem Reap &copy; Katrine"
feature_row_Milton_Glaser:
  - image_path: assets/img/posts/Milton_Glaser_We_re_Always_Looking_But_We_Never_Really_See_Adobe_99U.png
    alt: A screenshot of the quoted web page in the post
    title: "Milton Glaser: We’re Always Looking, But We Never Really See"
    excerpt: |
      “That sketch taught me something interesting about the mind,” he says. “We’re always looking, but we never really see.” Although Glaser had looked at his mother every single day of his life, he didn’t see her until he tried to draw her.
    url: https://99u.adobe.com/articles/7167/milton-glaser-were-always-looking-but-we-never-really-see
    btn_label: Read more
    btn_class: btn--primary

feature_row_active_learning:
  - image_path: assets/img/posts/Getting_started_with_Active_Learning.png
    alt: A screenshot of the quoted web page in the post
    title: What is active learning?
    excerpt: |
      Active learning is a process that has student learning at its centre.
      Active learning focuses on how students learn, not just on what they
      learn. Students are encouraged to ‘think hard’, rather than passively
      receive information from the teacher.
    url: https://99u.adobe.com/articles/7167/milton-glaser-were-always-looking-but-we-never-really-see
    btn_label: Read more
    btn_class: btn--primary

---

Kids inherit wealth or poverty from parents. How about creativities?
Biologically, maybe at some level. Probably, negligible. Recent researches
revealed that people inherit _creative potential_, but that does not guarantee
actual performance, or results. Environmental factors must be playing the
major role. Mozart became the greatest composer in history not because his
father was a violinist, but because the father gave him the best possible
education in music at the time. Not all parents are fortunate in having such
options to kids. But you are not raising another Mozart, are you? There are
always things parents can do for kids.

My neighbour, Simon and Katrine, the owners of [Babel
Guesthouse](https://www.babelsiemreap.com/), have daughters. A few days ago,
it was the birthday of their daughter. In the morning on that festive day, the
mother showed me pictures of her gifts to the daughter.

{% responsive_image
    path: "assets/img/posts/Ice_Cream_Shop_at_Babel.jpeg"
    alt: "Cute handmade ice cream shop in a room, made by the mother"
    caption: "Simon and Katrine built an ice cream shop for the kids. Wat Bo, Siem Reap &copy; Katrine"
%}

They built a small ice cream shop in a room. Look at the details. A small
kitchen, cooking utensils, and a signboard. They even installed a PoS system.
No compromise. God is in the details.

Their product, an ice cream shop, shows exactly what creative people can do.
In this country, options are always limited. No Toys"R"Us. Very few craft
stores. They used whatever available in the town. For them, "making things
here is easier and cheaper than in Norway", the mother said.

Katrine asked what the daughter like by showing pictures on the Internet.
Three-years-old kids do not know what they like because, naturally, they like
whatever they see. Here is the problem: "what is the best birthday gift for my
daughter?" There are many possible solutions to the problem. She does not like
plastic toys as they are fragile, sometimes even toxic. She wanted a unique,
robust, and safe gift, which would be remembered in the daughter's whole life.

Although the parents probably never put into words, the problem can be
described as a problem statement:

> As a kid, I would like to enjoy the experience in an ice cream shop, buying
> an ice cream, paying money for it, and tasting it so that I can enjoy my
> birthday with my friends, and remember the day as one of the best birthday in
> my life.

Next, the parents created the ideas to solve the problem. What is necessary
for that experience?  A counter to order ice creams. A signboard to welcome
customers. A kitchen with cooking utensils. Payment must be part of the
experience, too. Lastly, as the user is a kid, the shop must be cute! Let's
see what others are doing in similar projects. The Internet has great
resources to find interesting, creative works, like
[Pinterest](https://www.pinterest.com/).

They now have ideas. Are materials available in the town? Some are available,
others are not. Maybe something else can be re-used? Let's see what is
available at local shops.
[Sakura](https://www.google.com/maps/place/%E1%9E%9F%E1%9E%B6%E1%9E%82%E1%9E%BC%E1%9E%9A%E1%9E%B6-Sakura+Recycle+Shop+Japan/@13.3615804,103.8486548,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x3110170858b74987:0x7608c956390ec216!8m2!3d13.3615804!4d103.8508435)
has many second hand, or recycled products from Japan. You cannot order a real
signboard for this purpose.  Let's make one as paints are not very expensive.

The result is &mdash; you probably agree &mdash; a great product. The parents
has another plan for the next Xmas, too. But I do not reveal the idea here. No
spoiler.

During the process, they must have learnt many things. What kind of paints
should be used for the signboard? To make it realistic, but cute at the same
time, what should be placed?  Katrine said "it was easy", but there must have
been many challenges &mdash; maybe small ones &mdash; and findings. She just
never realized she actually learnt something in the process, but they did.
They learnt not because they were told to do so.  They had a problem to solve,
and they learnt to solve the problem by doing. In this process, learning is
not a goal, but a method to solve problems.

If you are a designer, a developer, or one of those who work in product
development, the story sounds quite familiar. They are practicing Design
Thinking. If you are a teacher, the last paragraph might be familiar. It is
called Active Learning.

## Design Thinking

[Design Thinking (wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_thinking)
is a process to create products &mdash; commonly practiced in industries
&mdash; in which products are designed, developed and manufactured with
solution-focused thinking. Simply put, it is a process for innovation.

> Design thinking refers to the cognitive, strategic and practical processes
> by which design concepts (proposals for new products, buildings, machines,
> etc.) are developed.

They empathized user's need (the daughter, in this case). What does her
daughter love? Asking users what they want is often a bad idea in product
development. Most of people often request what, _they think_, they need, which
is not necessarily the solution to the problem. If you asked someone in the
18th century what they need, they would have said they need a faster horse,
not a car.

The problem statement above is called "user stories" in software development.
A user story is used to describe the problem from _the users' perspective_ to
clarify and simplify the requirement. Note that the subject in user stories is
not the designer, or the creator, of the product, but the user of the product.
A user story must clearly describe who wants to do what and why. The parents
then explored possible solutions, and explored creative ideas. With ideas and
available materials in the town, they prototyped the product. It must have
been quite a challenge when you have two small kids. As the birthday is only
once a year, you cannot redesign, or improve your solution this time, but
maybe next year? Or Xmas?  They will surprise kids with different solutions,
and they will continue doing so. This is called "Iteration".

## Active Learning

[Active Learning (wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_learning)
is:

> a method of learning in which students are actively or experientially
> involved in the learning process and where there are different levels of
> active learning, depending on student involvement

Active Learning is widely used in STEM &mdash; science, technology,
engineering and mathematics &mdash; education programs.

{% include feature_row id="feature_row_active_learning" type="right" %}

Traditionally, teachers transfer what students should learn, and the students
apply the knowledge to problems. In Active Learning, problems are given to
students, and the students learn knowledge to solve the problems. It does not
negate the value of lecturing, but gives students strong incentives to learn
by doing.

## Not just another buzzword

Design Thinking is not a new idea. There are many early examples of Design
Thinking in history. Some creative people, and _makers_, practice the theory
knowingly or unknowingly. In software development, the idea is one of the most
basic concept you should have grasped before claiming to be a developer.

In most of projects by _makers_, creating things is a process to practice
Active Learning. You want a solution to problems you are facing, but modern
technologies almost always requires you to learn new things, or learn old
things the hard way; by making mistakes. Learning by doing, or learning by
making mistakes, is a great way to learn. You never forget the mistakes you
have made, the reasons of the failures, and the solutions. Theories and
knowledge are still important. Active Learning gives students incentives to
learn knowledge and theories.

But you need a name to actually _see_ the ideas.  Milton Glaser, the designer
of "I &hearts; NY", once told in an interview, "We're always looking, but we
never really see."

{% include feature_row id="feature_row_Milton_Glaser" type="left" %}

To applying the ideas to organizations, development processes, or even
classrooms, you need to name the ideas, and theorize the ideas.
Traditionally, Active Learning education programs are called "workshops", or
"hands-on activities". Some says that Active Learning is "probably the oldest
teaching method." Humans learnt how to use fire by doing. The biggest
difference is that many _see_ the ideas now, and explore, theorize, and apply
the ideas.

## Makers to the rescue

We need creative, innovative people with knowledge and experience, and
abilities to learn and apply the knowledge to problems, but how?

At "Makers", [BBC micro:bit course]({{ "makerspace/courses/Microbit_Basic" |
relative_url }}) and [other courses]({{ "/makerspace/courses" | relative_url
}}) for beginners are aimed at providing this kind of development process, and
opportunities to solve problems by learning.  I, an engineer, am not a
teacher, but have been a professional troubleshooter.  Students of the class
will learn not only Design Thinking, but troubleshooting skills by
experiments, too.

Do you like the idea? If you do, please [support the
project](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/trombik/1274353640?ref=4wrsfe&token=4bdafeb9).
The kickstarter project is currently under review. We will publish the updates
about the project in the blog soon.

We have published [a post about our plan of BBC micro:bit courses]({{
"/blog/makerspace/2020/06/30/Microbit-Courses/" | relative_url }}) before.
Hopefully, I will be able to introduce micro:bit to curious readers. DHL send
me an SMS message today, saying my order is on its way.

## Final words

Be creative to raise creative kids. You do not have to be rich for that. Money
can solve certain types of problems, but creativity can do a lot more than
money.  I do not know what the result will be in the daughter's life.
Probably, the products the parents built for kids, their attitude towards
problem-solving, and kids' experience on their birthday, will make them
creative. When the two daughters are old enough to be able to understand the
problems their parents have solved, the daughters will appreciate the efforts
and understand why they did. These are certainly the greatest gifts to their
daughters.
