---
lang: en
title: "Supporting honest business: an electrician"
tags:
  - misc
---

Many tourists say Cambodian people are nice, easygoing, and friendly. While
it is an aspect of the people, there are other points of view. In this post, I
would like to introduce an electrician and issues we encounter in Cambodia
&mdash; or other countries in the region.

{% responsive_image
    path: "assets/img/Mr-Puth-Nong.jpg"
    alt: "Mr Puth Nong (left) and his team"
    caption: "Mr Puth Nong (left) and his team"
    component Mr. P
%}

Mr Puth Nong (left in the photo) speaks good English, certainly not the best
in the town, but we can communicate without issues. He is a good engineer,
judging from his works and how he works. He keeps promises, and is on time. He
actually replies to your questions in Telegram chat. At the site survey before
the deal, he explains what is the root cause, and what needs to be done, or
what he would deliver. He listens and understands your requirements, and
provides alternative solutions where necessary. He is slightly more expensive
than "brothers and sisters" explained later, but it is worth the extra.  His
team is efficient, and the boss manages the team very well. He has
"hire-and-forget" capability, which does not require further guidance after
once the deal is made.

All in all, he is the one I am happy to work with. Ask me if you need a good
engineer for your business, I'll share his contact under his permission.

{: .notice--info }
While I am not an electrician, I had been managing various IT vendors and it
was my job to assess how they talk and what they promise before making deals.

## The background

The reason I introduce him in this post is that I would like to explain issues
we encounter &mdash; you probably might have known better than I do if you are
a business owner &mdash; and to promote ones who do business with modern,
accepted practices.

Being a tourist is one thing, and living and doing business is another. It is
true that Cambodia is business-friendly &mdash; licences, visa, regulations,
etc &mdash; however, business owners often have difficulties here: finding
reliable, and competent technicians.

When you have common technical issues, such as plumbing or electronic one, it
is not very difficult to find solutions here. It seems that everyone knows
someone to fix these issues; "my brother can fix it".

{: .notice--info }
Brothers and sisters in this context do not necessarily mean _real_ brothers
and sisters. They might be a niece or nephew, a son of his friend, someone
they know, or even someone they don't.

## A typical case

Here is a typical case. The case is not specific to the country. You most
likely have heard of similar stories in other countries in the region.

You ask a technician that someone introduced, to fix an issue. He is supposed
to speak English, claimed by the man-in-the-middle.  He wants to see what the
issue is to estimate the cost and man-hour for the work.  He promises to come
at 9:00 tomorrow.

He comes to your place with the man-in-the-middle by surprise after an hour
&mdash; contrary to the promise &mdash; just because that time was convenient
for him. You interrupt what you are working on at that time, and tries to
explain the issue, and find out that his English is slightly better than
simple greetings. The man-in-the-middle _kindly_ translates your conversation.
You point out that he is not an English speaker, but it is not a problem
because "he understands everything", the man-in-the-middle claims. You are a
bit afraid of _lost in translation_, but you have no other options.

At the end of the discussion, you ask a quote. The quote is sometimes twice or
three times more than what you usually expects. When you tell him that the
price is bit expensive, the price goes down to slightly more reasonable price
without explanation.

On the day of the work, he comes late without notice. When the issue is
relatively simple, such as a broken valve, he fixes it. Otherwise, you need to
explain your requirements, acceptable solutions, and what you actually need.
Again, _lost in translation_ sneaks in. He does what you tell, nothing more or
nothing less, even when the solution is not optimal or desired.

After lots of frustrating conversations, the issue is finally gone, or you hope
so. If you are not lucky enough, it repeats again. In this process, you are
wasting money and &mdash; more importantly &mdash; time.

Like any other South East Asian countries, many technicians do not speak
English; I never met one while I was in Thailand. That is understandable and
acceptable. What I don't like is that they claim they do even when it turns
out to be false quickly after a short conversation. I would say they are not
lying, but the point is, they are not very honest, either. Some might say I
should speak the local language, which is true. However, I deliberately speak
English in business and my classes because English comprehension is quite
important in modern world, which is particularly true in this country where it
relies on foreign tourists, customers, and businesses.  It is widely shared
among all generations that English skill provides better salary.  In IT
industry, I never trust those who cannot speak, read, or write English.

Similarly, cheating and double-pricing is not uncommon. They cheat not only
tourists but even local customers. "Bellum omnium contra omnes" &mdash; the
war of all against all in English &mdash; is the business practice they know
and they have been doing. I know there are exceptions, of course, but they are
not the rule.

Modern business entities in this country know better, and are adapting common
and accepted business practices now, and we should promote the trend.

{: .notice--info }
For the sake of many guides, and tuk-tuk drivers, I would like to emphasize
that it is surprisingly less likely for them to cheat you. Unlike other very
touristic towns in the region, &mdash; Phuket or Ho Chi Minh City for example
&mdash; they do know honest services are more profitable in the long term. You
would be charged slightly more than local residents &mdash; e.g.  for local
transportation &mdash; but I would say it is a fair expectation, and
acceptable.

## Conclusions

I hope that the post does not sound like just another rant. Instead, we should
support and promote local businesses that does the Right Thing &trade;. I will
continue writing similar posts in the future.
